# 2-MiniJava-Parser-and-Semantic-Analyzer

## About
Description of the second homework assignment can be also found [here](https://cgi.di.uoa.gr/~compilers/project.html).
This homework consists of building a parser and semantic analyzer for MiniJava, a subset of Java. MiniJava is designed so that its programs can be compiled by a full Java compiler like javac.

MiniJava is fully object-oriented, like Java. It does not allow global functions, only classes, fields and methods. The basic types are int, boolean, int [] which is an array of ints, and boolean[] which is an array of booleans. You can build classes that contain fields of these basic types or of other classes. Classes contain methods with arguments of basic or class types, etc.

MiniJava supports single inheritance but not interfaces. It does not support function overloading, which means that each method name must be unique. In addition, all methods are inherently polymorphic (i.e., "virtual" in C++ terminology). This means that foo can be defined in a subclass if it has the same return type and argument types (ordered) as in the parent, but it is an error if it exists with other argument types or return type in the parent. Also all methods must have a return type--there are no void methods. Fields in the base and derived class are allowed to have the same names, and are essentially different fields.

All MiniJava methods are "public" and all fields "protected". A class method cannot access fields of another class, with the exception of its superclasses. Methods are visible, however. A class's own methods can be called via this. E.g., this.foo(5) calls the object's own foo method, a.foo(5) calls the foo method of object a. Local variables are defined only at the beginning of a method. A name cannot be repeated in local variables (of the same method) and cannot be repeated in fields (of the same class). A local variable x shadows a field x of the surrounding class.
In MiniJava, constructors and destructors are not defined. The new operator calls a default void constructor. In addition, there are no inner classes and there are no static methods or fields. By exception, the pseudo-static method main is handled specially in the grammar. A MiniJava program is a file that begins with a special class that contains the main method and specific arguments that are not used. The special class has no fields. After it, other classes are defined that can have fields and methods.
Notably, an A class can contain a field of type B, where B is defined later in the file. But when we have class B extends A, A must be defined before B. As you'll notice in the grammar, MiniJava offers very simple ways to construct expressions and only allows < comparisons. There are no lists of operations, e.g., 1 + 2 + 3, but a method call on one object may be used as an argument for another method call. In terms of logical operators, MiniJava allows the logical and (&&) and the logical not (!). For int and boolean arrays, the assignment and [] operators are allowed, as well as the a.length expression, which returns the size of array a. We have while and if code blocks. The latter are always followed by an else. Finally, the assignment A a = new B(); when B extends A is correct, and the same applies when a method expects a parameter of type A and a B instance is given instead.

The visitors you will build should be subclasses of the visitors generated by JTB, but they may also contain methods and fields to hold information during static checking, to transfer information from one visitor to the next, etc. In the end, you will have a Main class that runs the semantic analysis initiating the parser that was produced by JavaCC and executing the visitors you wrote. You will turn in your grammar file, if you have made changes, otherwise just the code produced by JavaCC and JTB alongside your own classes that implement the visitors, etc. and a Main. The Main should parse and statically check all the MiniJava files that are given as arguments.

Also, for every MiniJava file, your program should store and print some useful data for every class such as the names and the offsets of every field and method this class contains. For MiniJava we have only three types of fields (int, boolean, and pointers). Ints are stored in 4 bytes, booleans in 1 byte and pointers in 8 bytes (we consider functions and int or boolean arrays as pointers). Corresponding offsets are shown in the example below:

Input:
```java
  class A{
      int i;
      boolean flag;
      int j;
      public int foo() {}
      public boolean fa() {}
  }

  class B extends A{
      A type;
      int k;
      public int foo() {}
      public boolean bla() {}
  }
```
Output:
```bash
  A.i : 0
  A.flag : 4
  A.j : 5
  A.foo : 0
  A.fa: 8
  B.type : 9
  B.k : 17
  B.bla : 16
```

## Compilation
- All needed files are in the current folder, so just run `make` (be sure to run it within the correct dir).

## Run
- The driver implements the wanted usage, so -after compilation- run `java Main [file1] [file2] ... [fileN]`.<br/>
- Driver checks all files, even if one (or more) of them fail on check.<br/> At the end, if at least one input program7xRdmTvXjeQLjdU has failed, program exits with error code 1, else 0.<br/>
- Print pattern is the same as in the tutorial's test files.

## Tests - Script
- In the /tests directory, you can find tests (all of the ones in the course's site and some more) splitted in two directories:<br/> `/errors` and `/normal`.<br/>
- The normals -let's say Input.java- have also their expected result for the offset table in file Input.txt.<br/>
- There is also a script that run each file separately and check if the program has the expected behavior.<br/>